RFC-1090 for unmanaged generic struct types (#480)
fsharp/fslang-design: RFCs/FS-1090-Generic-struct-type-whose-fields-are-all-unmanaged-types-is-unmanaged.md

# F# RFC FS-1088 - (Generic struct type whose fields are all unmanaged types is unmanaged)

The design suggestion [Generic struct type whose fields are all unmanaged types is unmanaged](https://github.com/fsharp/fslang-suggestions/issues/692) has been marked "approved in principle".
This RFC covers the detailed proposal for this suggestion.

* [x] Approved in principle
* [x] [Suggestion](https://github.com/fsharp/fslang-suggestions/issues/692)
* [ ] Implementation: [In progress](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/pull/6064)

# Summary

[summary]: #summary

Allow generic structs to be `unmanaged` at construction if all fields are `unmanaged` types.

# Motivation

[motivation]: #motivation

* Feature parity with C#.

> * Improve interoperability with C#.

Reviewer: Feature party with C# is not a goal in and of itself. Interop is, so that should stay.

The chief motivation here should be from the F# perspective: better support for low-level programming in F#, specifically when it comes to offer provably safe compile-time analysis so that we don't allocate needlessly. It's actually nearly identical to the [C# motivation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/proposals/csharp-7.3/blittable), though there may be some F#-specific considerations here.

> 

Reviewer: With two goals - better low-level F# programming and better C# interop - there should be two examples of code you'd like to write here that you can't write in F# today. One about doing low-level programming entirely in F#, and another using a C# API that assumes (in some form) that a caller is unmanaged (but only if you cannot use that API today).

Author: Updated

# Detailed design

[design]: #detailed-design

Currently, it is not possible to have an `unmanaged` constraint working on generic struct types.

Consider following code:

```fsharp
[<Struct>]
type Test<'T when 'T: unmanaged> =
        val element: 'T

let works = Test<int>()
let error = Test<Test<int>>()

```

Prior to this RFC, the example above will fail to compile with:

```less
let error = Test<Test<int>>()
  ------------^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

stdin(6,13): error FS0001: A generic construct requires that the type 'Test<int>' is an unmanaged type
```

> This proposal aims to eliminate this restriction by treating generic struct type `unmanaged` if all its fields are `unmanaged`.

Reviewer: This is the sort of thing that should go in the motivation section.

> 

Reviewer: Here we'll need a few things:

* What the definition of an unmanaged type is
* How the existing [`umanaged`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/fsharp/language-reference/generics/constraints) constraint is to be adjusted (if at all)
* All types that are considered unmanaged (e.g., the numeric primitives)
* Example of custom struct that is unmanaged and one that is not
* How do we consider struct records? Allowed, subject to specific rules, disallowed, etc.
* How do we consider struct anonymous records? Allowed, subject to specific rules, disallowed, etc.
* How do we consider struct single-case DUs? Allowed, subject to specific rules, disallowed, etc.
* How do we consider struct multi-case DUs? Allowed, subject to specific rules, disallowed, etc.
* How do we deal with the `modreq` on existing APIs marked with them for this constraint?
* Do we also emit an `modreq`?
* C# has their [own metadata representation ](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/proposals/csharp-7.3/blittable#metadata-representation)since the F# constraint put them in a little design hole. What do we do about that?

(Note on `modreq` - we don't really use it correctly. @dsyme and @TIHan can fill you in on that bag of fun)

Author: I've updated examples, supported types, posted a description of the unmanaged types, etc.
I will need some time to figure out `modreq` part though.

> ## Examples

Reviewer: These are great from the F# perspective. Pending consideration for records and DUs, we'll also want examples for that. We may also want to show what it's like interoperating with a .NET API marked with the constraint.

Author: Added some description of supported types, based on the current implementation PR.

Basic examples:

```fsharp
[<Struct>]
type S<'T, 'U> =

    [<DefaultValue(false)>] val X : 'T

let test (x: 'T when 'T : unmanaged) = ()

let passing () =
    test (S<float, int>())

let passing2 () =
    test (S<float, obj>()) // passes as the 'obj' type arg is not used as part of the backing field of a struct

let passing3<'T when 'T : unmanaged> () =
    test (S<'T, obj>())

let not_passing () =
    test (S<obj, int>())

let not_passing2<'T> () =
    test (S<'T, obj>())
```

Constructor:

```fsharp
[<Struct>]
type S<'T> =

    val X : 'T

    new (x) = { X = x }

let test (x: 'T when 'T : unmanaged) = ()

let passing () =
    test (S(1))

let not_passing () =
    test (S(obj()))
```

Nested generics:

```fsharp
[<Struct>]
type W<'T> = { x: 'T }

[<Struct>]
type S<'T> = { x: W<'T> }

let test (x: 'T when 'T : unmanaged) = ()

let passing () =
    test Unchecked.defaultof<S<int>>

let not_passing () =
    test Unchecked.defaultof<S<obj>>
```

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> No drawbacks.

Reviewer: I suppose there is technically is a drawback insofar as it has a limited F# audience, since most F# programmers are not doing low-level programming. But it is somewhat of a "completeness" feature that fits in with other work done in F# 4.5 to make F# more suitable for low-level work.

Author: Updated

# F# RFC FS-1088 - (Generic struct type whose fields are all unmanaged types is unmanaged)

The design suggestion [Generic struct type whose fields are all unmanaged types is unmanaged](https://github.com/fsharp/fslang-suggestions/issues/692) has been marked "approved in principle".
This RFC covers the detailed proposal for this suggestion.

* [x] Approved in principle
* [x] [Suggestion](https://github.com/fsharp/fslang-suggestions/issues/692)
* [ ] Implementation: [In progress](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp/pull/6064)

# Summary

[summary]: #summary

Allow generic structs to be `unmanaged` at construction if all fields are `unmanaged` types.

# Motivation

[motivation]: #motivation

> * Make it easier to author low level interop code.

Reviewer: Although this will primarily be for calling APIs that likely do some native interop, it could be possible to be 100% F# code. So I think this is probably better as "low-level code", since that encapsulates both.

* Improve interoperability with C#.

# Detailed design

[design]: #detailed-design

> Currently, it is not possible to have an `unmanaged` constraint working on generic struct types.

Reviewer: This will need additional clarification:

```suggestion
Currently, it is not possible to define a generic struct with the `unmanaged` constraint and substitute the type with another generic struct, even if its type is also constrained to be `unmanaged`.
```

> Consider following code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider the following code:
```

```fsharp

> [<Struct>]
> type Test<'T when 'T: unmanaged> =
>         val element: 'T
> 
> let works = Test<int>()
> let error = Test<Test<int>>()
> 

Reviewer: I recommend the code sample also includes an example of a custom struct that does work.

```suggestion
[<Struct>]
type MyStruct(x: int, y: int) =
    member _.X = x
    member _.Y = y
    
[<Struct>]
type MyStructGeneric<'T when 'T: unmanaged>(x: 'T, y: 'T) =
    member _.X = x
    member _.Y = y

[<Struct>]
type Test<'T when 'T: unmanaged> =
    val element: 'T
        
let works = Test<int>()
let works2 = Test<MyStruct>()

// error FS0001: A generic construct requires that the type 'MyStructGeneric<int>' is an unmanaged type
let error = Test<MyStructGeneric<int>>()
```

Reviewer: This also means that this won't work either:

```fsharp
[<Struct>]
type MyStruct(x: byref<int>, y: byref<int>) =
    member _.X = x
    member _.Y = y
```

Which feels like a big gap in the feature area.

Reviewer: Nor this

```fsharp
[<Struct>]
type MyStruct(x: Span<int>, y: Span<int>) =
    member _.X = x
    member _.Y = y
```

Nor this:

```fsharp
let fails = Test<Span<int>>()
```

```

Prior to this RFC, the example above will fail to compile with:

```less

> let error = Test<Test<int>>()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
let error = Test<MyStructGeneric<int>>()
```

  ------------^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> stdin(6,13): error FS0001: A generic construct requires that the type 'Test<int>' is an unmanaged type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stdin(6,13): error FS0001: A generic construct requires that the type 'MyStructGeneric<int>' is an unmanaged type
```

```

> This proposal aims to eliminate this restriction by treating generic struct type `unmanaged` if all its fields are `unmanaged`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal aims to resolve this inconsistency by treating a generic struct type as `unmanaged` if all its fields are unmanaged.
```

Reviewer: The  way this is worded makes it sound like I won't need to specify `unmanaged` in a generic struct definition, and it will "just work" so long as the `'T` being substituted is unamanaged. Is that correct, or do I need to be explicit in my type definition?

Author: @cartermp Yeah, the idea is that you won't need to specify the unmanaged constraint and it will "just work".
I will add a note about it in the RFC.

> ## Definition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Adjusted definition of an unmanaged type
```

> An unmanaged-type is any type that isn't a reference-type and contains no fields whose type is not an unmanaged-type.

Reviewer: In this section it would be good to lay out the existing F# definition and then give the adjustment, like so:

```suggestion
The existing definition of an `unamanged` type is:

* `sbyte`, `byte`, `short`, `ushort`, `int`, `uint`, `long`, `ulong`, `char`, `float`, `double`, `decimal`, or `bool`.
* Any enum type.
* Any `nativeptr<_>`.
* Any non-generic user-defined struct-type that can be statically determined to be 'unmanaged' at construction.
```

We adjust this definition by modifying the last section:

```
Any user-defined struct type that can be statically determined to be 'unmanaged' at construction.
```

In other words, an unmanaged-type is one of the following:

* `sbyte, byte, short, ushort, int, uint, long, ulong, char, float, double, decimal, or bool`.
* Any enum-type.
* Any pointer-type.

> * Any generic user-defined struct-type that can be statically determined to be 'unmanaged' at construction.

Reviewer: This section would be obviated with the suggested layout.

> 

Reviewer: Would be good to give a simple example of a user-defined struct that is unmanaged vs. one that is not unmanaged.

> ## Implementation details

Reviewer: Needs some more info:

* Can I mix `unamnaged` with other generic constraints? Right now I can actually write the following code that looks like absolute nonsense.

```fsharp
[<Struct>]
type Test<'T when 'T: unmanaged and 'T: not struct> =
    val element: 'T
```

This and other silly things you can do today should be corrected as a part of this change. `unmanaged` implies `struct` in C#, which I would expect to be the case here. We'll need an example of doing this and what the error message should say.

* Clarify that the constraint is enforced by the language, not the runtime

* Clarify that nested fields in structs must also be unmanaged, with examples of working/not-working

Author: > * Can I mix `unamnaged` with other generic constraints? Right now I can actually write the following code that looks like absolute nonsense.

That is actually one of the things I wanted to add, and didn't, because I assumed it works already (I thought that you cannot mix 'unmanaged' and 'not struct' now).
I will add a point for fixing this.
Thanks for noticing.

Author: Added a point to implementation details.

* Any existing generic struct type will be considered unmanaged when all of its fields are unmanaged types.
* `IsUnmanagedAttribute` should be emitted on type arguments with the `unmanaged` constraints (for interop).
* Treat type arguments with `IsUnmanagedAttribute` as if they have the `unmanaged` constraint (for interop).

## Supported types

> * Generic struct types.
> * Struct records.
> * Anonymous struct records.
> * Struct tuples.
>   * Struct tuples are thread as unmanaged as long as all the elements are unmanaged;
> * Struct unions.
>   * Single-case unions types are treated as unmanaged as long as underlying type is unmanaged.
>   * Multi-case unions are treated as unmanaged as long as all underlying types are unmanaged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Generic struct types whose fields are unmanaged
* Struct records with unmanaged fields
* Anonymous struct records with unmanaged fields
* Struct tuples with unmanaged values
* Struct unions (single and multi-case) whose fields are all unmanaged
```

## Examples

The following examples are not possible now and will be once feature is implemented.

Basic examples:

```fsharp
[<Struct>]
type S<'T, 'U> =

    [<DefaultValue(false)>] val X : 'T

let test (x: 'T when 'T : unmanaged) = ()

let passing () =
    test (S<float, int>())

let passing2 () =
    test (S<float, obj>()) // passes as the 'obj' type arg is not used as part of the backing field of a struct

let passing3<'T when 'T : unmanaged> () =
    test (S<'T, obj>())

let not_passing () =
    test (S<obj, int>())

let not_passing2<'T> () =
    test (S<'T, obj>())
```

Constructor:

```fsharp
[<Struct>]
type S<'T> =

    val X : 'T

    new (x) = { X = x }

let test (x: 'T when 'T : unmanaged) = ()

let passing () =
    test (S(1))

let not_passing () =
    test (S(obj()))
```

Nested generics:

```fsharp
[<Struct>]
type W<'T> = { x: 'T }

[<Struct>]
type S<'T> = { x: W<'T> }

let test (x: 'T when 'T : unmanaged) = ()

let passing () =
    test Unchecked.defaultof<S<int>>

let not_passing () =
    test Unchecked.defaultof<S<obj>>
```

> Union types:

Reviewer: Needs examples where it doesn't work

```fsharp
[<Struct>]
type Container<'a> = Container of 'a

let test (x: 'T when 'T : unmanaged) = ()

test (Container 1)
```

> Tuples:

Reviewer: Needs example where it doesn't work

```fsharp
let x = struct(1,2,3);;

let test (x: 'T when 'T : unmanaged) = ()

test (x)
```

> Records:

Reviewer: Needs example where it doesn't work

let error = Test<MyStructGeneric<int>>()

// error FS0001: A generic construct requires that the type 'MyStructGenericWithNoConstraint<int>' is an unmanaged type
let error = Test<MyStructGenericWithNoConstraint<int>>()
```

Prior to this RFC, the example above will fail to compile with:

```less
let error = Test<MyStructGeneric<int>>()
  ------------^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

stdin(6,13): error FS0001: A generic construct requires that the type 'MyStructGeneric<int>' is an unmanaged type
```

This proposal aims to resolve this inconsistency by treating any generic struct type as `unmanaged` if all its fields are unmanaged.

__NOTE:__ Both generic struct types _with_ and _without_ the `unmanaged` constraint on type parameter(s) can be treated as unmanaged as long as type parameters are being substituted by an unmanaged type(s).

For example, consider the following code:

```fsharp
[<Struct>]
type MyStructGeneric<'T when 'T: unmanaged>(x: 'T, y: 'T) =
    member _.X = x
    member _.Y = y

[<Struct>]
type MyStructGenericWithNoConstraint<'T>(x: 'T, y: 'T) =
    member _.X = x
    member _.Y = y
```

> Instances of both `MyStructGeneric<'T>` and `MyStructGenericWithNoConstraint<'T>` will be treated as unmanaged type as long as `'T` is being unmanaged.

Reviewer: I think I understand this section, but it's a little confusing (perhaps due to my feedback).

Both of these struct types should be usable as an unmanaged type. That is, I could do this:

```fsharp
let t = Test<MyStructGeneric<int>>()
let t' = Test<MyStructGenericWithNoConstraint<int>>()
```

Having the constraint on the type I am substituting the `'T` in `Test` with is not required with this change.

In other words, any generic struct where all its fields are known to be unmanaged can be considered unmanaged.

Kind of a mouthful and getting the definition across clearly is kind of difficult. But I think if you include examples of instantiating `Test` with both it will be clearer.

Author: I've changed some wording, hope it's more clear now :)

## Adjusted definition of an unmanaged type

__The existing definition of an unmanaged type is any type that isn't a reference-type and contains no fields whose type is not an unmanaged type:__

* `sbyte, byte, short, ushort, int, uint, long, ulong, char, float, double, decimal, or bool`.
* Any enum-type.
* Any pointer-type.
* Any non-generic user-defined struct type that contains fields of unmanaged-types only.

__We adjust this definition by modifying the last section:__

* Any user-defined struct type that can be statically determined to be 'unmanaged' at construction.

Examples:

```fsharp
// Always unmanaged (forced by constraint).
[<Struct>]
type MyStructGeneric<'T when 'T: unmanaged>(x: 'T, y: 'T) =
    member _.X = x
    member _.Y = y

> // Will be unmanaged, asl long as 'T is unmanaged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Can be considered unmanaged, as long as 'T is unmanaged.
```

[<Struct>]
type MyStructGenericWithNoConstraint<'T>(x: 'T, y: 'T) =
    member _.X = x
    member _.Y = y

> // Will be unmanaged, asl long as 'T is unmanaged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Can be considerd unmanaged, as long as 'T is unmanaged.
```

> // Note, that despite constructor having and unmanaged argument (obj), it is not used as part of the backing field.

Reviewer: > unmanaged argument (obj)

Do you mean managed?

Author: Yeah, typo, will fix

[<Struct>]
type MyStructGenericWithUnusedUnmanagedParameter<'T>(x: 'T, y: 'T, z: obj) =
    member _.X = x
    member _.Y = y

> // Not unmanaged, since it has a field with a non-unmanaged type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Not unmanaged, since it has a field with a managed type.
```

[<Struct>]
type MyStructGenericWithUnmanagedField<'T>(x: 'T, y: 'T, z: obj) =
    member _.X = x
    member _.Y = y
    member _.Z = z
```

## Implementation details

* Any existing generic struct type will be considered unmanaged when all of its fields are unmanaged types.
* `IsUnmanagedAttribute` should be emitted on type arguments with the `unmanaged` constraints (for interop).
* Treat type arguments with `IsUnmanagedAttribute` as if they have the `unmanaged` constraint (for interop).
* [`UnmanagedType`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.unmanagedtype?view=netcore-3.1) modreq should be emitted on type argument (for interop).
* An `unmanaged` constraint cannot be used together with `not struct` constraint (not the case right now).

## Supported types

* Generic struct types whose fields are unmanaged
* Struct records with unmanaged fields
* Anonymous struct records with unmanaged fields
* Struct tuples with unmanaged values
* Struct unions (single and multi-case) whose fields are all unmanaged

## Examples

> The following examples are not possible now and will be once feature is implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following examples are now possible with this feature:
```
